--- PAGE 1 ---

Cross-Working Group Work Items;
Automated Valet Parking 
Technology Assessment and 
Use Case Implementation Description;
System Architecture, Cellular 
Network and PC5 Direct 
Communication Solutions
5GAA Automotive Association
Technical Report


--- PAGE 2 ---

Cross Working Group Work Item 2
CONTACT INFORMATION:
Lead Coordinator – Thomas Linget
Email: liaison@5gaa.org 
MAILING ADDRESS:
5GAA c/o MCI Munich
Neumarkter Str. 21
81673 München, Germany
www.5gaa.org
Copyright © 2023 5GAA. All Rights Reserved.
No part may be reproduced except as authorised by 
written permission. The copyright and the foregoing 
restriction extend to reproduction in all media.
VERSION: 
DATE OF PUBLICATION: 
DOCUMENT TYPE: Technical Report
EXTERNAL PUBLICATION: 
DATE OF APPROVAL BY 5GAA BOARD:


--- PAGE 3 ---

Cross Working Group Work Item 3
Contents
Foreword .................................................................................................... 5
Introduction .................................................................................................... 6
1 Scope .................................................................................................... 6
2 References ................................................................................................ 7
3 Definitions, symbols and abbreviations ....................................................... 8
3.1 Definitions ..................................................................................... 8
3.2 Symbols ........................................................................................ 8
3.3 Abbreviations ................................................................................ 8
4 System architecture .................................................................................. 10
5 Working assumptions and requirements for AVP use case implementation .... 13
6 Protocols .................................................................................................. 16
7 AVP use case implementation flows .......................................................... 17
7.1 Overview of AVP use case procedure ............................................. 17
7.2 High-level communication sequences ............................................ 17
7.2.1 AVP services discovery, reservation, and payment .......................... 17
7.2.2 Vehicle parking process ................................................................ 20
7.2.3 Vehicle re-park to a different location ............................................ 21
7.2.4 Vehicle retrieval ........................................................................... 22
7.3 Detailed communication sequences for AVP Type-2 ........................ 24
7.3.1 A. Check-in sequence ................................................................... 24
7.3.2 B. Handover sequence ................................................................. 26
7.3.3 C. Mission assignment sequence ................................................... 27
7.3.4 D. Destination and route (automated vehicle operation Type-2) ...... 28
7.3.4.1 Uu-based implementation ............................................................ 28
7.3.4.2 PC5-based implementation ........................................................... 30
7.3.5 E. Destination reached (optional) ................................................... 33
7.3.6 F. Mission accomplished ............................................................... 33
7.3.7 G. Sleep sequence ........................................................................ 34
7.3.8 H. Wake-up sequence ................................................................... 35
7.3.9 I. Hand-back sequence ................................................................. 36
7.3.10 J. Check-out sequence .................................................................. 37
8 Implementation considerations for cellular network solutions .................. 38
8.1 Considerations for cellular public networks .................................... 38
8.1.1 Network coverage in parking facilities ............................................ 38
8.1.2 Network switching to the preferred MNO network in a parking facility . 39
8.1.3 QoS provisioning in the cellular network ........................................ 40
8.1.3.1 Network exposure realisations ...................................................... 40
8.1.3.2 3GPP QoS assurance mechanisms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
8.1.3.3 Network slicing ............................................................................ 42
8.1.4 Global availability and roaming ..................................................... 42
8.1.4.1 Authentication and roaming ......................................................... 42
8.1.4.2 Regional breakout ........................................................................ 43
8.1.5 Additional network features support AVP ...................................... 43
8.1.5.1 Discontinuous reception (DRX) framework ..................................... 43
8.2 Considerations for the cellular non-public network ......................... 44
8.2.1 Public network integrated non-public network ............................... 44
8.2.2 Stand-alone non-public network ................................................... 44
8.2.2.1 SNPN core network aspect . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45


--- PAGE 6 ---

Cross Working Group Work Item 6
Contents
Introduction
This 5GAA Technical Report presents the results of the 5GAA Work Items Use 
Case Implementation Description Phase II (UCID II) and Automated Valet Parking 
(AVP) using solutions based on cellular public networks, Standalone Non-Public 
Networks (SNPN) and short-range PC5 Direct Communication technologies. 
Contents
1 Scope
The present document describes the system architecture and use-case implementation 
details of Automated Valet Parking Type-2 [3] with the focus on wireless communication 
solutions using cellular public networks, Standalone Non-Public Network (SNPN) 
and short-range communication technologies. In addition to high-level and detailed 
communication sequences of the AVP Type-2 use case, the implementation 
considerations for cellular public network-based solutions, SNPN-based solutions and 
PC5 Direct Communication are also elaborated considering AVP service deployment 
requirements.


--- PAGE 7 ---

Cross Working Group Work Item 7
Contents
2 References
- References are either specific (identified by date of publication, edition number, 
version number, etc.) or nonspecific.
- For a specific reference, subsequent revisions do not apply.
- For a non-specific reference, the latest version applies. 
[1] ISO/FDIS 23374-1 Intelligent transport systems – Automated valet parking 
systems (AVPS) – Part 1: System framework, requirements for automated 
driving, and communication interface, May. 2022.1 
[2] 5GAA A-200094, Technical Report, V2X Application Layer Reference Architecture, 
June 2020.
[3] 5GAA T-210023, Draft Use Case Description Automated Valet Parking, Bosch 
and BMW, March 2021
[4] 5GAA Technical Report, Safety Treatment in Connected and Automated Driving 
Functions, March 2021
[5] Ericsson Whitepaper, Ericsson Dynamic Network Slice Selection, 2022. https://
www.ericsson.com/48fd7e/assets/local/networks-slicing/docs/ericsson-
dynamic-network-slice-selection-2022.pdf 
[6] GSMA, eSIM Whitepaper – The What and How of Remote SIM Provisioning, 
March 2018. https://www.gsma.com/esim/wp-content/uploads/2018/12/esim-
whitepaper.pdf 
[7] C-V2X Use Cases and Service Level Requirements Volume II, v2.1, February 
2021, 5GAA_T-200116, ( https://5gaa.org/news/c-v2x-use-cases-and-service-
level-requirements-volume-ii/)
[8] https://www.telekom.com/en/media/media-information/archive/automated-
valet-parking-with-5g-648970
[9] GSMA RSP (Remote SIM Provisioning) Technical Specification, Version 2.4, Oct 
2021, https://www.gsma.com/esim/wp-content/uploads/2021/10/SGP.22-
2.4.pdf
[10] 3GPP TS 23.501, 5G; System Architecture for the 5G System, v15.13.0,23 March 
2022
1 Standard ISO 23374-1 is expected to be planned in Dec. 2022


--- PAGE 8 ---

Cross Working Group Work Item 8
Contents
3 Definitions, symbols 
and abbreviations
3.1 Definitions
For the purposes of the present document, the following definitions given in ISO 22374-
1:2021 and the following apply:
AVP network: communication network used in a parking facility to support AVP 
services, e.g. for data communication between the subject vehicle and the AVPOS and 
between the subject vehicle and its Vehicle Application Server (vehicle backend).
3.2 Symbols
For the purposes of the present document, the following symbols apply:
OB Operator backend
P Automated valet parking facility management
R Remote vehicle operation
U User frontend
UB User backend
V On-board vehicle operation
VB Vehicle backend
3.3 Abbreviations
For the purposes of the present document, the following abbreviations apply:
5QI 5G QoS Identifier
AMQP Advanced Message Queuing Protocol
API Application Programming Interface
APP Application
AS Application Server
AVP Automated Valet Parking
AVPC AVP Control 
AVPOS AVP Operator System
AVPS AVP System
AVP FM AS AVP Facilities Management Application Server
BTP Basic Transport Protocol
E2E End-to-End
EPA European Parking Association
FW Firewall
GBR Guaranteed Bit Rate


--- PAGE 11 ---

Cross Working Group Work Item 11
Contents
Functional components in the system include:
AVP Operator Application Server (AVP Operator AS), also known as Operator 
Backend (OB) in [1] 
3 
The AVP Operator AS interacts with the Vehicle AS and User AS via backend 
communications to provide AVP services to the user. Tasks of AVP Operator 
AS include at least:
- Managing parking facility availability. 
- Checking compatibility between vehicle and parking facility.
- Dispatching vehicle into driverless operation.
- Via Vehicle AS, handing over authority (rights and ability to perform 
tasks on the vehicle) with user.
- Forwarding information between AVP RVP AS (remote vehicle operation) 
and Vehicle AS.
3 The AVP Operator AS communicates with the AVP FM AS and AVP RVO AS within 
the AVPOS.
AVP Remote Vehicle Operation Application Server (AVP RVO AS), also known as 
Remote vehicle operation (R) in [1] 
3 
The AVP RVO AS for Remote Vehicle Operation receives information (e.g. 
infrastructure sensor data) from the AVP FM AS and/or AVP FM App. The 
AVP RVO AS in turn calculates the vehicle manoeuvre trajectory and provides 
instructions to the Vehicle App in the vehicle using the VMC logical interface. 
The AVP RVO AS communicates with the AVP Operator AS for service AVP 
service management.
Vehicle Application Server (Vehicle AS), also known as Vehicle Backend (VB) in [1] 
3 The Vehicle AS at the OEM vehicle backend offers services to the vehicles 
manufactured by the OEM and to its drivers and passengers by communicating 
with the Vehicle App. It communicates with the AVP Operator AS and User AS 
via backend connectivity.
3 Vehicle AS is responsible of remote engagement/disengagement of AVP service 
of Vehicle App in the vehicle.
Vehicle Application (Vehicle App), also known as on-board Vehicle operation (V) 
in [1] 
3 
The Vehicle App integrates services offered by the Vehicle AS into vehicles. 
For the AVP service, it performs the on-board vehicle operation following 
manoeuvre instructions received via the VMC logical interface, either directly 
from the AVP RVO AS or via the Vehicle AS. In this sense, the Vehicle App also 
takes the role of remote application for the AVP RVO AS.
User Application Server (User AS), also known as User Backend (UB) in [1] 
3 The User AS at the User Backend, which can be hosted by the OEM User Backend, 
offers services for end users by communicating with the User App, e.g. installed 
on the user’s smart phone or at the fleet management level. The User AS also 
communicates with the Vehicle AS to receive AVP service-related information 
from the AVP Operator AS, and it sends AVP service requests from the end 
user.


--- PAGE 12 ---

Cross Working Group Work Item 12
Contents
User Application (User App), also known as User Frontend (U) in [1] 
3 The User App provides the services offered by User AS to the end user, e.g. via 
the smart phone App or the fleet management system. 
AVP Facility Management Application Server (AVP FM AS), also recognised as part 
of automated valet Parking facility management (P) in [1] 
3 
The AVP FM AS manages the local AVP Operator System, including parking 
facility gates and sensors installed at or in the local infrastructure, etc. It 
communicates with the AVP Operator AS and the AVP RVO AS and executes 
the AVP service commands from the AVP Operator AS and AVP RVO AS. It also 
provides infrastructure sensor data to the AVP RVO AS, to support remote 
vehicle operation. 
AVP Facility Management Application (AVP FM App), also recognised as part of 
automated valet Parking facility management (P) in [1]
3 
The AVP FM App integrates the services and functions provided via the AVP FM 
AS into the AVP Operator System infrastructure, e.g. the parking facility gate 
and infrastructure sensors. It provides infrastructure sensor data to AVP FM AS 
and/or AVP RVO AS and executes commands from AVP FM AS.
Interchange Function (IF)
3 Given the potentially large number of different AVP operators in real deployment 
scenarios, Interchange Functions are needed to automate the discovery of AVP 
operators and scale up communications between AVP Operator ASs and Vehicle 
ASs, to avoid full mesh connectivity. The IF is out scope of the ISO standard [1].
Figure 2 above also shows the logical interfaces, for which the implementation details 
are described in Section 5.
3 AVPC: Automated Valet Parking Control logical interface between the OB AVP 
Operator AS (OB) and Vehicle AS (VB) for management and control signalling 
communications among AVP services (e.g. authentication and authorisation 
information, network information, service and server discovery, AVP service 
requests and reservations, etc. This logical interface is also known as 
“management interface” in ISO 23374-1 [1].
Note: this logical interface may also be implemented via the Interchange 
Function to improve the scalability of the system.
3 VMC: Vehicle Motion Control logical interface between the AVP RVO AS (R) and 
Vehicle App (V) for communicating VMC information (e.g. driving commands 
and instructions from the AVP RVO AS and vehicle status information from the 
Vehicle App). This logical interface can be implemented without going through 
the Vehicle AS (VB) or Vehicle AS (VB), as shown in Figure 2. This logical interface 
is also known as “operation interface” in ISO 23374-1 [1].
- The VMC interface can be implemented without going through the 
Vehicle Backend, but for security reasons the VMC interface needs to 
be set up under the supervision of the Vehicle Backend.
- As an alternative implementation option for automotive OEMs wanting 
the communication to and from vehicles to go via their backend


--- PAGE 13 ---

Cross Working Group Work Item 13
Contents
systems – in order to utilise existing firewall, filters etc. – the VMC 
interface can be implemented via the Vehicle Backend. This option 
could potentially make it easier to modify interaction with parking 
providers and to provide/introduce new features for end customers, 
as the bulk of the complexity is handled in Vehicle Backend systems.
The communication domain between application servers and within the AVP Operator 
System is typically done via secured interconnections between trusted actors over 
the internet. This communication domain is also commonly known as ‘backend 
communication’. 
The communications between Application Servers (AS) and their respective Apps 
(clients) typically use cellular networks spanning different generations.
5 Working assumptions 
and requirements for AVP 
use case implementation
Regardless of the wireless communication technology used, the requirements for AVP 
use case implementation include the following:
1. For security and privacy reasons, all communication links and logical 
interfaces in the AVP implementation architecture (Figure 2) shall be 
secured appropriately, e.g. through end-to-end (E2E) encryption or 
hop-by-hop communication links among trusted entities. 
2. Trust shall be established between the Vehicle AS and AVP Operator AS.
A. The parking facility shall be ‘approved’ to provide the AVP 
service. 
B. Vehicles shall be ‘approved’ to use the AVP service.
C. Trust for network access means: 
I. The vehicle and the (preferred) AVP network shall be mutually 
authenticated. 
D. Trust for applications means: 
I. The Vehicle AS and AVP Operator AS shall be mutually 
authenticated before any AVP session.
II. For any AVP mission, the AVP RVO AS needs to be mutually 
authenticated with the connected Vehicle AS, if the VMC is 
implemented via the Vehicle AS, or with the Vehicle App, and 
if the VMC is implemented directly between the Vehicle App 
and AVP RVO AS.


--- PAGE 14 ---

Cross Working Group Work Item 14
Contents
3. When vehicles are in the parking facility, it shall be ensured that the 
OEMs have access and control at any time to their connected vehicles 
in a secure way.
4. A short vehicle connectivity interruption (at second level) shall be 
allowed during the drop-off (hand-over) and pick-up (hand-back) 
processes (e.g. due to possible network reselection within the AVP 
network). Note: the communication between Vehicle AS and AVP 
Operator AS shall be possible and maintained.
5. Vehicles shall be able to enter power-saving mode when left in the 
parking facility. 
6. Vehicles shall have the ability to be remotely activated (woken up) and 
reached by the authenticated entities, i.e. the corresponding Vehicle 
AS.
7. The user shall be able to get the vehicle back, in the event of an AVP 
Operator System failure.
A. In the worst case scenario (e.g. total power failure of the parking 
facility), the vehicle can be moved manually. 
8. The vehicle shall flash its hazard lights during the establishment 
of the mission i.e. the ‘vehicle hand-over task’ supporting a vehicle 
identification procedure. 
9. Vehicles to be parked shall be capable of executing the received 
manoeuvre instructions from the AVP RVO AS, e.g. driving direction, 
speed, acceleration, distance, as described in [1] for AVP service Type 2. 
When a cellular network is used for implementing an AVP use case, the following 
assumptions apply:
3 Wireless connectivity shall be treated as an ‘open-channel’ for functional safety. 
- Note: when wireless communication is concerned, functional safety 
requirements are fulfilled using the open channel approach to gether 
with safety monitoring on both communication sides. With this 
approach the wireless communication network does not need to be 
developed according to ASIL or other similar safety schemes. [4]
3 The AVP application layer protocol shall work with standard IT protocols and 
security methods (TLS, IP, etc.).
3 When developing the communication solution between the vehicle and AVP 
Operator System, the sensors in the infrastructure shall be already connected 
within the AVP Operator System, fulfilling the required network characteristics.
3 Connectivity between Cellular Network Operators and AVP RVO AS shall utilise 
Quality of Service (QoS) mechanisms to guarantee Key Performance Indicators 
(KPIs) according to the defined and applicable Service Level Requirement (SLR) 
values. This can be realised through, for example, network design to ensure 
QoS, Mobile Edge Computing (MEC) deployments, etc.


--- PAGE 15 ---

Cross Working Group Work Item 15
Contents
The following additional assumptions apply when cellular SNPN is use d for the 
implementation of AVP:
3 Spectrum for SNPN is available according to regional rules.
3 Network coverage at the drop-off and pick-up area – vehicle needs to have 
access to the public network of its network provider and SNPN network in the 
drop-off and pick-up zone. 
3 The parked vehicle shall maintain ‘reachability’ with the Vehicle Backend via 
IP because a valid IP route is the only way of reaching the vehicle to trigger 
wake-up.
3 If the AVP NPN is operating with a SIM Profile:
- Vehicles need to support eSIM.
- Vehicles need to support the installation of multiple eSIM profiles 
(minimum two; one for OEM MNO and one for current AVP SNPN).
3 Support for download, installation and use of certificate-based authorisation 
in case AVP SNPN is operating with this technology option.
3 It is assumed that roaming solutions will not be used between public networks 
and SNPN.
3 Trusted relationship between Vehicle Backend and AVP SNPN core network 
for the Vehicle Backend to be informed about an IP address change from the 
AVP SNPN core. This assumption should be validated as part of Section 7.2.1, 
Figure 4, Step III.5.
The following additional assumptions apply when PC5 Direct Communication is used 
for the VMC interface:
3 Cellular network coverage (public or SNPN) should be available throughout the 
parking facility
3 ITS spectrum is available and appropriate channels are allocated
3 ITS RSU coverage is available throughout the area where the vehicles are 
remotely operated
Note: Solutions based entirely on direct communication are currently out of scope of 
these work items.


--- PAGE 16 ---

Cross Working Group Work Item 16
Contents
6 Protocols
The below table summarises the main properties and requirements for the AVP use 
case realisation:
Category Item Description
Use case name Automated Valet Parking (AVP)
Relation to 
other use cases
Tele-operated Driving (ToD) [7]
Actors and roles Automated Valet Parking Operator: provides the AVP service by means of 
Remote Vehicle (RV) motion guidance, after obtaining approval from the OEM 
Host Vehicle (HV): HV is able to park by receiving motion guidance from AVPOS
HV Automotive OEM: approves AVP operation of HV by AVP Operator
Information 
classification
VMC information including both operational and functional safety information, 
transmitted between AVP RVO AS and Vehicle App
Parking management control information transmitted between Vehicle App, 
Vehicle AS and AVP Operator AS, such as service discovery, reservation, 
payment, and AVP network information, are needed to enable AVP services
Standards and 
technology
Access layer 
technology/ies
Cellular Uu interface in 4G and beyond systems for communicating with 
vehicles
In addition, LTE-V2X or NR-V2X PC5 interfaces may be used for VMC procedure
(Communication between Vehicle AS and AVP Operator AS are done using 
wired communication)
Network and 
transport layer 
technologies
For Uu: IP with TCP/UDP with secure connections, i.e. TLS/DTLS
For PC5: (Non-IP) GNW, BTP, WSMP
Message 
standards
AVP application protocols need to be developed and standardised
Framework Uu: IP protocol stacks
PC5: ETSI TC ITS protocol stacks (EU), WAVE based protocol stacks (US)
Application 
requirements
Use case 
triggers
User device or Vehicle Backend starts AVP operation
Required 
information in 
the vehicles
N/A
Network layer 
requirements
Required 
coverage
Cellular coverage in vehicle drop-off area and AVP operation area
Alternatively: LTE-V2X/NR-V2X PC5 coverage in AVP operation area with 
minimal cellular QoS and cellular coverage in vehicle drop-off and wake-up 
area
Required 
availability
N/A


--- PAGE 17 ---

Cross Working Group Work Item 17
Contents
7 AVP use case implementation flows
7. 1 Overview of AVP use case procedure
In this chapter, the use case is mapped to the communication architecture and 
illustrated with sequence diagrams including the main parameters conveyed. Figure 3 
shows the events and vehicle states in the AVP service cycle, starting from the user who 
wants to park through to when the vehicle is handed back to the owner and resumes 
normal driving operations after the AVP service. The following subsections describe 
the high-level, detailed sequences/diagrams of communication in different AVP service 
stages, namely AVP service discovery and reservation, vehicle parking process, vehicle 
re-parking process, and vehicle retrieval process.
Figure 3: Events and vehicle states in AVP service cycle
7. 2 High-level communication sequences
7 .2.1 AVP services discovery, reservation, and payment
It is assumed that for a scalable, automated solution, methods are needed to announce 
the presence of available AVP parking/slots. This can be done in a number of ways, 
such as by using Advanced Message Queuing Protocol (AMQP) solutions where the 
AVP operator publishes the availability of AVP parking and free slots, known as an 
AVP service announcement, and the Vehicle AS subscribes to this type of information. 
The AVP service announcement needs to be standardised or agreed among industry 
players. In this case, the Interchange Function can serve as a message broker, e.g. 
using AMQP, for AVP service announcements. Alternatively, if the Vehicle AS does not 
subscribe to AVP announcements, it can still use the Interchange Function to ‘discover’ 
available AVP operators, when a user requests such a service via the Vehicle AS. In this 
case, the Interchange Function serves as a discovery server (e.g. digital map server) 
maintaining the AVP operator list. As a result of the AVP service discovery process, the


--- PAGE 18 ---

Cross Working Group Work Item 18
Contents
Vehicle AS delivers information about the availability of AVP operators matching the 
users’ parking demands and the capabilities of their vehicles.
For successful deployment of AVP, methods are needed to reserve a parking spot 
before the vehicle arrives at the facility and to pay for the parking service. This can be 
done by using the AVP operator’s information (e.g. URL) obtained from AVP service 
announcement. To make AVP service reservations, the service demand information 
(e.g. parking duration and slot availability) as well as the capability information (e.g. 
supported AVP types and interfaces) need to be exchanged between the AVP Vehicle 
App and the AVP Operator AS via the Vehicle AS.
Examples of AVP service discovery and reservation processes and communication 
sequences are shown in Figure 4 covering part I ‘Preparation’, part II ‘AVP Service 
Discovery’, and part III ‘AVP Service Reservation’. 
For the AVP SNPN network, download and installation of AVP SNPN eSIM profile or 
certifications need to be completed before the vehicle parking process is initiated. 
Please refer to Section 8.2.2.5 for details on eSIM and certification download, 
installation, and activation.
Payment can, for example, be handled by registered credit cards or in the case of a fleet 
operator (e.g. rental car company) by prior agreements using monthly billing facilities.


--- PAGE 20 ---

Cross Working Group Work Item 20
Contents
7 .2.2 Vehicle parking process 
This section describes the vehicle parking process of AVP Type-2 [1] at or within the 
parking facility.
This description is also applicable for AVP at or within an OEM logistics parking area. 
In such scenarios the Vehicle AS would be the OEM factory control system (fleet 
management system), and the ‘drop-off point’ is the location for vehicles ready for 
parking. In such scenarios, the communication would be limited to interaction between 
the vehicle and the OEM factory control system (fleet management system). The OEM 
factory control system would incorporate a series of needed/essential functions, such 
as MAP handling (i.e. were to park the vehicle).
As shown in Figure 2, for AVP Type-2 in a public parking facility, the Vehicle Backend 
is connected to the vehicle, validates AVP requests and collects driving data directly 
from the vehicle. In the AVP process, the Vehicle Backend may also work as a gateway 
passing on requests and commands (e.g. for the VMC interface, between the vehicle 
and the AVP Operator System). In another implementation option of the VMC interface, 
the Vehicle Motion Control and feedback information may not need to pass through 
the Vehicle Backend if a secure channel can be directly established between the vehicle 
and the AVP Operator System, under the supervision of Vehicle Backend. The Vehicle 
Backend system is thus connected to the AVP operator backend. [1] 
Figure 5 illustrates the high-level process of vehicle parking, starting from vehicle check-
in to the vehicle being parked and entering sleep mode once in the allotted space. This 
process is algined with the ISO 23374-1 [1] standard. The description below within the 
blue brackets describes specific steps, where interactions with the AVP NW, i.e. the 
MNO NW or SNPN in this case, are needed.


--- PAGE 21 ---

Cross Working Group Work Item 21
Contents
Figure 5: High-level communication sequences for AVP Type-2 parking process
7 .2.3 Vehicle re-park to a different location
This section describes the vehicle re-parking process of AVP Type-2 [1] from one 
location to another in the parking facility, as shown in Figure 6. Explanations in blue 
brackets describes specific steps, where interactions with the AVP NW, i.e. the MNO 
NW or SNPN in this case, are needed.


--- PAGE 22 ---

Cross Working Group Work Item 22
Contents
Figure 6: High-level communication sequences for AVP Type-2 re-park process
7 .2.4 Vehicle retrieval 
This section describes the vehicle pick-up process, AVP Type-2 [1], from the vehicle 
parking location to the vehicle pick-up area.
This description is also applicable to AVP at or within an OEM logistics parking area, 
in such scenarios the Vehicle AS would be the OEM factory control system (fleet 
management system) and the ‘pick-up’ point would be the location where vehicles 
waiting to be transported from the factory parking area can be found.
In such a scenario, the communication would be limited to interaction between 
the vehicle and the OEM factory control/fleet management system, which would 
incorporate functions such as MAP handling (i.e. where to park the vehicle for pick-up).
As shown in Figure 2, illustrating AVP Type-2 in public parking facility, the Vehicle 
Backend system is connected to the vehicle, validates AVP requests and collects driving 
data directly form the vehicle. As stated previously, in the AVP process the Vehicle


--- PAGE 23 ---

Cross Working Group Work Item 23
Contents
Backend system can also work as a gateway passing on requests and commands. 
Another option outlined earlier is where the VMC interface, the vehicle motion control 
and feedback information don’t need to go through the Vehicle Backend because a 
direct channel has been established between the Vehicle App and the AVP Operator 
System, and thus the Vehicle Backend system is connected to the Automated Valet 
Parking Operator System securely. [1] 
To summarise, the user or fleet management system decides to pick up a ve hicle, 
wakes it up and then the AVP Operator System provides instructions on the how to 
manoeuvre the vehicle, which in turn executes the instructions until the vehicle reaches 
the designated pick-up location, where it is handed over to the user or loaded onto a 
truck/ship, etc.
Figure 7 illustrates the high-level process covering vehicle retrieval. Again, the 
explanations in blue brackets describe specific steps, where interactions with the AVP 
NW, i.e. the MNO NW or SNPN in this case, are needed.

Figure 7: High-level communication sequences for AVP Type-2 retrieval process


--- PAGE 25 ---

Cross Working Group Work Item 25
Contents
‘AVP network information’ in steps A.19 and A.20 includes the identifier and further 
information about the AVP network to enable the vehicle to access the AVP network. 
3 If the AVP network is a public cellular network, ‘AVP network information’ 
includes at least the Public Land Mobile Network (PLMN) ID and the Absolute 
Radio-Frequency Channel Number (ARFCN).
3 If the AVP network is a SNPN network, ‘AVP network information’ includes at 
least the available PLMN IDs, the Network Identifier (NID) of the SNPN and 
ARFCN.
3 If the AVP VMC network is PC5 Direct Communication , ‘AVP network 
information’ may include a new radio profile configuration (for example, RRC 
configuration) for AVP use.
For cellular public networks, A.21 to A.23 are the steps for the UE in the vehicle to 
switch to the AVP network. 
3 A.22 includes the step when the vehicle application instructs the modem 
to switch to a preferred NW and attaches itself according to standard 3GPP 
procedures. 
3 If the AVP network is a different AVP operator preferred MNO network than 
the one the UE has been connected to outside the parking facility, Section 8.1.2 
explains the network switching mechanism. 
For cellular non-public network/SNPN, the vehicle UE/modem first needs to detach 
from MNO network, then it switches to SNPN mode and executes a ‘network attach’ 
command. The SNPN network has to be known to the UE/modem and necessary 
credentials have to be exchanged before.
- A22 includes the step to detach from the MNO network.
- A23 includes the step when the vehicle application instructs the modem to 
switch to a SNPN NW and the modem attaches to SNPN according to standard 
3GPP procedures. Section 8.2.2 explains the SNPN aspects and network 
selection.
- A24 confirms the network change to the Vehicle Backend and re-establishes 
the connectivity including announcement of new IP after network change.
For PC5 Direct Communication-based VMC, basic cellular QoS settings should be 
negotiated over the selected Uu network, after which the vehicle awaits a VMC message 
over the PC5 Direct Communication channel.


--- PAGE 28 ---

Cross Working Group Work Item 28
Contents
7 .3.4 D. Destination and route (automated vehicle operation 
T ype-2)
The communication sequence diagram of “destination and route” is shown in Figure 
11, Figure 12a and Figure 12b for respective implementation options using the Uu 
interface and the PC5 interface. In this process, the functional driving tasks and safety 
tasks are separated. Each task has its own clock synchronisation and communication 
loops between the AVP Vehicle App and AVP RVO AS (remote control). Step D.7 ‘Driving 
Permissions’ in Figure 11, Figure 12a and Figure 12b, defined in ISO 23307-1 [1], is 
critical for the system to fulfil functional safety requirements. If the vehicle cannot 
receive a valid update before the current Driving Permission expires, or the permitted 
operations in the valid Driving Permission are violated, it has to stop. This is to ensure 
safety requirements are fulfilled, even if the connectivity between the vehicle and 
remote control fails.
The values and communication steps in green text in Figure 11, Figure 12a and Figure 
12b are sample values and optional steps which may need some refinements according 
to actual implementation situation.
7.3.4.1 Uu-based implementation 
For cellular networks and IP-based implementation, Figure 11 shows the communication 
sequence over the VMC, where the (to-be-standardised) messages for steps D.1, D.2, 
D.2a, D.2b, D.3, and D.7 terminate at the facilities layer of AVP RVO AS and AVP Vehicle 
App, respectively. Figure 22 in Section 8.3.2 shows the end-to-end protocol stacks.
Step D.8 is only applicable for cellular network-based implementations. In a cellular 
network, the QoS notification in step D.8 utilises the network exposure interface 
described in Section 8.1.3.


--- PAGE 36 ---

Cross Working Group Work Item 36
Contents
7 .3. 9 I. Hand-back sequence
Figure 17: Communication sequence for ‘hand-back’
In I.8, it describes what happens when the vehicle needs to switch to a preferred MNO 
for the AVP session; while leaving the parking facility the Vehicle Backend instructs the 
vehicle to switch back to the MNO used prior to the AVP session.
In I.8 if the vehicle needed to switch to a SNPN for the AVP session, then when leaving 
the parking facility the Vehicle Backend instructs the vehicle to deactivate the SNPN 
mode and switch back to MNO used prior to the AVP session.
I.9 is specific to SNPN and in I.9 the application on the vehicle side instructs the modem 
to deactivate the SNPN mode and detach from the SNPN network.
In I.10, the application on the vehicle side instructs the modem to switch to the MNO 
to be used outside the parking facility and attaches to the preferred NW according to 
standard 3GPP procedures. 
In I11, the application on the vehicle side confirms the network switch and re-
establishes connectivity with the Vehicle Backend (e.g. announce new IP address) after 
the network has changed.


--- PAGE 38 ---

Cross Working Group Work Item 38
Contents
8 Implementation considerations 
for cellular network solutions
Based on the application-level system architecture for AVP Type-2 in Figure 2, Figure 19 
illustrates how cellular networks enable the end-to-end IP connectivity for key system 
interfaces in actual implementations. Particularly, for the VMC interface between AVP 
RVO AS and Vehicle App, either cellular Public Networks (PN) or Stand-alone Non-
Public Networks (SNPN) can transparently transfer VMC messages on top of secure 
IP connections. This chapter presents the implementation considerations for cellular 
network solutions covering both PN and SNPN. 
Figure 19: Architecture of cellular network-based AVP implementation
8.1 Considerations for cellular public 
networks 
8.1.1 Network coverage in parking facilities
In many cases, parking facility owners have an agreement in place with MNOs. If there 
is a need to extend or enhance the existing cellular public network in the parking facility 
to support AVP, it can be done by updating the existing agreement or making new 
agreements with these MNOs.


--- PAGE 39 ---

Cross Working Group Work Item 39
Contents
In order to improve the customer experience, there is an inherent investment driver 
for MNOs to boost network coverage in parking facilities. This has already been seen 
in high-value parking garages in airports, train stations, concert halls and shopping 
malls, with a lot of mobile network traffic. Also, MNO agreements exist on a case-by-
case basis between the MNO and the facility owner, to reduce complexity and costs of 
coverage. There are also examples where tower companies invest in passive and active 
infrastructure, which is then shared by multiple MNOs. One additional investment 
driver is the increase of car-sharing vehicles, which can only be served if there is good 
network coverage.
To provide AVP Type-2 service to vehicles, it should be noted that technical requirements 
need to be fulfilled by the parking facilities, including the communication network, 
which are under the responsibility of the parking facility owner supported by the MNOs.
For this AVP Type-2 use case implementation description, it is assumed that major 
MNOs are already present because initial AVP scenarios are likely to occur mainly in 
urban and suburban areas or in other high mobile traffic locations, such as shopping 
areas, transport hubs and country clubs. It is assumed that most parking areas have 
coverage at least on some floors and, since the uptake of AVP-capable vehicles will 
happen over time, AVP can initially be restricted to those areas already covered.
When the penetration rate of AVP-capable vehicles increases, coverage for deep 
underground parking facilities can be gradually realised. Here, several approaches are 
possible including: 
3 MNOs provide additional radio equipment, potentially using network-sharing 
between MNOs.
3 Tower companies, network infrastructure real estate providers, or the parking 
facility owners provide space or a site where MNOs can set up.
In this situation, there might be no need for more advanced 5G coverage; from a 
bandwidth perspective, as well as latencies, LTE might be sufficient in many cases.
An additional factor is the spectrum available for the networks. Because coverage 
improvement is one of the most important investment drivers, spectrum with better 
propagation capabilities inside buildings will reduce upfront capital needs.
8.1.2 Network switching to the preferred MNO network in a 
parking facility
A ‘preferred MNO’ refers to a network operator who provides an agreed level of AVP 
coverage and performance to a given parking facility. Information about preferred 
MNO(s) is provided to the Vehicle Backend system from the parking facility system. 
The Vehicle Backend then orders the application in the vehicle to switch to the 
indicated MNO network, i.e. in a roaming situation the vehicle switches connection 
from one ‘visited NW’ to another. The switching should be executed in the drop-off/
pick-up zones. The information from the parking facility system to the vehicle (via 
the Vehicle Backend) about the ‘preferred network’ comprises frequency bands (e.g. 
ARFCNs) and NW identities (e.g. PLMN ID), so the in-vehicle application can configure 
the modem to attach to this network and speed up network reselection. The vehicle 
application can also read out information about the used network from the modem 
and store that in order to facilitate faster reselection when the vehicle is picked up. 
Such network-switching follows the roaming process between MNOs and is possible 
where subscriptions with permanent roaming are used (in many cases globally). Of


--- PAGE 40 ---

Cross Working Group Work Item 40
Contents
course, roaming contracts between MNOs need to be in place, which is mostly the case. 
If no permanent roaming is in place, MNOs who have AVP-capable vehicles among their 
subscribers will need to be accommodated. Alternatively, national roaming would have 
to be applied or the coverage has to be extended to the area where the parking facility 
is located, thus enabling AVP services to vehicles using cellular connectivity from any 
MNO. 
Note: This does not hinder collaboration between MNOs regarding network-sharing 
mentioned in Section 8.1.1.
8.1.3 QoS provisioning in the cellular network
As coverage is a prerequisite for a well-functioning mobile network, it is important 
to address possible congestion scenarios affecting the ability to fulfil AVP use-case 
requirements. Quality of Service needs to be established for the AVP application, 
specifically controlling the motion of the vehicle.
This section first introduces the 3GPP features for prioritising dedicated application 
traffic flows and offers an introduction to so-called ‘Network Exposure’ interfaces 
interacting with the cellular network.
8.1.3.1 Network exposure realisations
The 5G system also supports Network Exposure interfaces which allow more dynamic 
interaction. The 5G system ‘exposes’ different Network Services that can be viewed, 
configured or modified by authorised Application Service Providers. 
The Network Exposure interfaces follow the HTTP REST Model, which is widely used 
in the internet community. 3GPP has standardised a set of APIs, which thanks to the 
Network Exposure Function (NEF) supports QoS Flow setup. The NEF AFsessionWithQoS 
API is formally specified in TS 29.522. However, TS 29.522 refers to TS 29.122 for the 
detailed specification. TS 29.122 contains the T8 reference point, which is exposed by 
the SCEF in the 4G system. 
CAMARA provides an abstraction of the network APIs to simplify the use of 3GPP 
network features, e.g. for ‘QoS on Demand’. By hiding telecommunications complexity 
behind APIs and making them available across telco networks and countries, CAMARA 
enables simple and seamless access. CAMARA is an open source project within the 
Linux Foundation to define, develop and test the APIs. It works in close collaboration 
with the GSMA Operator Platform Group to align API requirements and definitions. 
Harmonisation of APIs is achieved through fast and agile working code with developer-
friendly documentation. API definitions and reference implementations are free to 
use (Apache2.0 licence). Currently, more than 25 ‘hyperscalers’, aggregators, telco 
operators and vendors are part of CAMARA (see camaraproject.org.)
8.1.3.2 3GPP QoS assurance mechanisms
Figure 18 illustrates the different 3GPP-defined QoS assurance mechanisms:
3 Network Slicing is defined in 3GPP as a logical network that provides specific 
capabilities and network characteristics. It is a tool to separate resources and 
provide a defined network characteristic, for example an Industry Vertical


--- PAGE 42 ---

Cross Working Group Work Item 42
Contents
8.1.3.3 Network slicing 
Network Slicing is a tool for separating network resources to provide a more consistent 
service. Additional tools, such as the 3GPP QoS framework, may be applied for traffic 
flows within a given Network Slice.
UE Route Selection Policy (URSP) provides a foundation to deliver dynamic Network 
Slice selection, enabling traffic steering and the separation of services for devices when 
using the slices. When devices are being provided with URSP capabilities, the UE is able 
to use the Network Slices according to the policies defined for the subscription. 
The network offers the information about available slice types to the device via URSPs, 
so the URSP adds further details regarding which network slices the device’s underlying 
applications should use when activated. [5] Therefore, the device knows in advance 
of a certain parking process, which slice types are available, and how to get access 
to the relevant slice type for the AVP application. Applicable slice(s) to use need to be 
discussed with the corresponding MNO.
8.1.4 Global availability and roaming 
8.1.4.1 Authentication and roaming
Authentication is required for different layers; network access and the application-level.
3 Authentication for network access:
- For cellular public network, Subscriber Identity Module (SIM)-based 
authentication is used, which works the same as authentication 
used by other connected vehicle applications in roaming situations. 
Network access credentials are stored on the SIM card and used for 
the authorisation (after unlocking the SIM). 
- Cellular public network solutions for AVP can work with just one SIM 
card. Switching network can be done via roaming, as explained in 
Section 8.1.2, but it is up to the car OEMs to use additional modem(s)/
SIMs for improved coverage or combined capacity from multiple MNO 
networks.
- Embedded SIM (eSIM) follows the same principle while increasing 
flexibility. As an example, vehicles can use an eSIM profile for the 
5G network in a factory and switch to another eSIM profile (from the 
contracted MNO) for connected vehicle services on public roads. GSMA 
has worked on the framework and solutions for eSIM profiles. [6]
3 Authentication for E2E communication at transport and/or application layers:
- TLS/DTLS supporting mutual authentication on top of the IP connection 
is well supported by cellular public networks.
- Any application layer authentication method (e.g. digital certificate 
or user credentials) that is agnostic to the lower layers can be used 
independently and in addition to cellular network authentication. 
- If digital certificates are used, the appropriate Public Key Infrastructure 
(PKI) needs to be in place, to ensure mutual trust between authenticated 
entities. This is out of scope of the present document.
In the roaming situation, Quality on Demand and Network Slicing described in Section


--- PAGE 45 ---

Cross Working Group Work Item 45
Contents
Untrusted Non-
3GPP AccessUE
N3IWF
3GPP 
Access
Data Network
HPLMN
Non-3GPP 
Networks
UPF
N3 N6
Y1
Y2
AMF SMF
N2
N2
N4
N3
NWu
N11
N1
N1
Figure 20a: Non-roaming architecture for 5G core network with untrusted non-3GPP access
8.2.2.1 SNPN core network aspect
SNPN 5G deployments are based on the architecture for the 5G Core, with untrusted 
non-3GPP type security and access procedures used to access the SNPN services, and 
with the additional functionality specific to SNPN, as explained. 
As an exception, the following 5G System features and functionalities are not supported 
for SNPNs:
3 Interworking with LTE/EPS.
3 Emergency services.
3 Roaming, e.g. roaming between SNPNs.
3 Handover between SNPNs, between SNPN and PLMN or PNI NPN.
3 Cellular IoT 5G System optimisations.
3 Closed Access Groups (CAG).
8.2.2.2 SNPN RAN aspects
In the current Release 16, direct access to the SNPN services is specified using 3GPP 
RAN access type only. No other access type is supported for the SNPN Core Network in 
Release 16.
In general, the same RAN principles as with a PLMN apply to SNPN with several 
exceptions.
NG-RAN nodes which provide access to SNPNs broadcast the following information:
3 One or multiple PLMN IDs.
3 List of NIDs per PLMN ID identifying the non-public networks that N G-RAN 
provides access to.
3 Optionally a human-readable network name per NID.
UEs operating in SNPN access mode only (re)select cells within the selected/registered 
SNPN and a cell can only be considered as suitable if the PLMN and NID broadcast by 
the cell matches the selected/registered SNPN.
The NG-RAN node is aware of the SNPN ID(s) supported by neighbour cells. At the 
time of handover, cells that do not support the serving SNPN ID are not considered as 
candidate target cells by the source NG-RAN node. The target NG-RAN node performs 
access control. If it cannot accept the handover for the serving SNPN, the target NG-
RAN node fails the handover including an appropriate cause value.


--- PAGE 47 ---

Cross Working Group Work Item 47
Contents
8.2.2.5.2 Extensible authentication protocol – transport layer 
security (EAP-TLS) 
EAP-TLS follows a similar principle as the eSIM profile switching, but instead uses digital 
certificates and EAP-TLS processes to attach to the NPN. 
Extensible Authentication Protocol (EAP) is an authentication framework frequently 
used in network and internet connections. Defined in RFC 3748 and updated by RFC 
5247. EAP framework is introduced in 3GPP 5G networks for use in network access 
authentication (See 3GPP TS 33.501). EAP-TLS (RFC 5216) using digital certificate may be 
used in network access authentication when attaching to non-public networks. Note: 
According to the current 3GPP specification, EAP-TLS cannot be used to access a public 
network.
To use EAP-TLS for the NPN network supporting the AVP use case, the following three 
general steps are needed:

Figure 20b General steps of using EAP-TLS for the NPN network supporting AVP use case
Step I: OEM vehicle models and AVP garages need to be mutually approved or approved 
by, for example, technical inspection institutes for using/providing AVP services. The 
OEM vehicle backend and AVP Operator backend establish a trust relationship either 
directly with each other or via a centralised organisation.
Step II: A digital certificate is created and provisioned to a vehicle for a booked AVP 
session. This step happens during the AVP service booking process well before the 
vehicle arrives at the parking facility.
Step III: When the vehicle is at the parking facility (drop-off/pick-up areas), an EAP-TLS 
network authentication process is performed for access to the NPN following 3GPP TS 
33.501. This covers mutual authentication between the vehicle and AVP network using 
AVP session certificate from step II. The AVP session certificate for vehicle can also 
be used for AVP application authentication and security, e.g. establishment of a TLS 
session between vehicle and AVP Operator System.


--- PAGE 54 ---

Cross Working Group Work Item 54
Contents
Additionally, in this implementation architecture the facilities layer, responsible for 
encoding and decoding the VMC messages, can be implemented in several locations:
3 On the AVP Operator System side: 
- As part of the AVP RVO AS (as in the cellular-based implementation 
described in Section 8). In this case, the RSU forwards encoded VMC 
messages between AVP RVO AS and AVP Vehicle App. 
- Reusing the existing ITS stack in the RSU: when utilising the existing 
ITS stack in the RSU, the RSU’s facilities layer encodes and decodes the 
VMC messages to/from vehicles. The AVP RVO AS and RSU exchange 
the content of the VMC messages using proprietary or standardised 
format selected by the implementor (see Figure 12b).
3 On the vehicle side: 
The location of the facilities layer on the vehicle side may vary between 
different vehicle OEMs and vehicle models (depending on OEM decision 
and the overall vehicle V2X architecture) and, as such, is out of scoup of 
this document. 
In addition, this architecture can be scaled up to accommodate larger areas by adding 
multiple AVP RVO AS units and grouping RSUs under different AVP RVO AS. This would 
allow the processing load of RSU/vehicle management to be offloaded between several 
AVP RVO ASs and thus expand the AVP coverage area.
For example, in a large multi-story parking facility deploying a dedicated AVP RVO AS 
for each floor controls the RSUs within its area. In this case, the AVP RVO AS would need 
to be inter-connected using wired (ethernet, etc.) or wireless links, to allow handover 
of vehicles from one AVP RVO AS to the next as the vehicle progresses along the route.


--- PAGE 55 ---

Cross Working Group Work Item 55
Contents
9 .1.2 Co-located RVO-RSU architecture (‘smart RSU’)
OEM App
On-board Vehicle 
Operation
VVehicle
RSU ITS Stack
RVO & RSU ITS Services
AVP RVO AS
R
VMC
RSU V2X Stack
RVO & RSU V2X Services
AVP RVO AS
RSU ITS Stack
RVO & RSU ITS Services
AVP RVO Logic
R AVP System
On-board Vehicle ITS 
Services
OBU ITS Stack
Figure 25: Co-located RVO-RSU architecture
Another possible implementation architecture would include deployment of so-called 
‘smart-RSUs’, which integrate both the AVP RVO AS and RSU functionalities. The single 
box solution can carry the communications (PC5) and computing hardware (CPU + 
Accelerators), and all the required firmware, AI, vision analytics, AVP RVO AS and V2X 
software stack within the same enclosure. It might be beneficial in some scenarios 
in terms of deployment, operational and maintenance cost. The multiple sensor 
measurements are input to the AI and vision analytics, fusion software stack to perform 
the environment perception, localisation and produce metadata. The AVP RVO AS takes 
the metadata and performs the scheduling, decision-making, path planning tasks, etc. 
It sends the vehicle control messages over the air through the V2X stack, C-V2X modem 
and RF frontend.
For larger areas, multiple smart RSUs may be deployed and connected to each other 
using wired (ethernet, etc.) or wireless links. A software framework may be running on 
the AVP RVO AS for information sharing between Smart RSUs. The decision-making may 
be done in a distributed manner and the decisions are shared between smart RSUs. In 
this scenario, handover from one AVP RVO AS to the next as the vehicle progress along 
the route is envisaged.


--- PAGE 56 ---

Cross Working Group Work Item 56
Contents
In some large deployments, all the smart RSUs may be connected to a centralised 
node (preferably an on-premises edge node) to collect metadata from each one, and 
preform localisation, path planning, scheduling and remote vehicle operation over a 
larger area. In some cases, the edge node may even create a digital twin of the parking 
area to perform these functions.
9 .1.3 Guidelines on RSU deployment
RSU deployment in general is always location and service dependent. The coverage 
area of an RSU is influenced by:
3 RSU location in relation to obstacles and the area to cover (e.g. in a parking 
facility scenario the best location would be a centre point on the parking floor, 
far from concrete columns).
3 Availability of required power and network access, locations allowing RSU 
mounting.
3 Antenna placement (i.e. extended from the RSU housing) and type (i.e. 
directional or omnidirectional).
Furthermore, the coverage and location of RSUs in urban and highway deployments are 
usually planned by local contractors working for the road operators, and depending on 
the scope of the deployment (e.g. RSU installation only or upgrade of the road network 
itself) various 3D modelling and simulation tools are also used.
Parking facilities tend to be complex to cover, especially ones with many columns 
and low height specifications, both of which tend to make signal propagation harder 
– crowded underground parking facilities face similar limitations to urban coverage 
scenarios). Using simulation software is advisable for initial planning and field testing 
on-site – thus creating an RSSI heatmap. 
Regarding vehicle handling, depending on the size of the parking facility and number 
of possible vehicles served, several handover and networking mechanisms can be 
used. In general, RSUs are capable (if Basic Awareness or similar is active) to maintain 
a database of ITS Stations within coverage and, signal strength can then also be 
monitored. Based on the final message properties, multiple RSUs nearby can broadcast 
messages to the intended vehicles or implement a more sophisticate approach for 
efficiency.


--- PAGE 57 ---

Cross Working Group Work Item 57
Contents
9. 2 Selection of PC5 Direct Communication 
-based vehicle motion control
9 .2.1 PC5 direct communication-based vehicle motion 
control use cases
The following use cases are considered for direct communication-based AVP vehicle 
motion control:
PC5 Direct Communication-Based Vehicle Motion Control as a Redundant System 
In this scenario, direct communication is used as a backup system for the Uu-based 
VMC described above. Possible use cases that may require a fallback to direct 
communication for VMC are:
3 Temporary degradation in QoS on the cellular network (e.g. due to network 
load, cell outage etc.)
3 Insufficient QoS in some locations of the garage (e.g. limited cellular coverage 
on the underground levels). In this case, the VMC targeted to parking spots 
on these levels will be performed using PC5 Direct Communication .
Note: A hybrid mode where VMC is switched from Uu-based to PC5 Direct 
Communication-based motion control and vice versa is out of scope of this 
document.
PC5 Direct Communication-Based Vehicle Motion Control as a Primary System
In this scenario, PC5 Direct communication is the only system for AVP Vehicle 
Motion Control. 
Possible use cases that would require this are:
3 Insufficient cellular QoS to allow Uu-based VMC.
3 PC5 Direct Communication is preferred for commercial reasons (e.g. utilising 
an existing RSU infrastructure in the parking facility).
3 Other market or regional regulatory incentives and/or requirements.
Note: In all cases, cellular coverage is still required throughout the premise as explained 
in Section 9.4.
9 .2.2 Requirements for availability of PC5 direct 
communication vehicle motion control
The following requirements should be met to allow PC5 Direct Communication Vehicle 
Motion Control:
3 Spectrum/regulatory conditions permit PC5 Direct Communication VMC.
3 Compliance with privacy regulations when using broadcast communication for 
AVP Type 2 VMC. 
3 Vehicle supports PC5 Direct Communication. 
3 There is sufficient RSU coverage throughout the AVP premises.


--- PAGE 59 ---

Cross Working Group Work Item 59
Contents
9.4 Assumptions on cellular coverage
Cellular coverage is required throughout the parking area to ensure vehicle connectivity 
for the following tasks:
3 Session management: 
- Vehicle wake up
- Tasks management: Managing the different tasks: washing, charging 
station etc…
- Re-parking
- Vehicle pick-up procedure
3 Vehicle recovery:
- Recover a vehicle due to a malfunction
o Recover a vehicle due to a blocked path
Note: The cellular coverage should ensure sufficient QoS to allow the above 
functionalities.
9. 5 Vehicle motion control interface – PC5 
direct communication-based vehicle 
motion control
The following figures describe the interaction needed when PC5 Direct Communication 
is used for the VMC interface. As shown in the application-level system architecture 
(Figure 2), information about vehicle movement is communicated through the VMC 
logical interface between the remote vehicle operation and the vehicle.
Figure 26 and Figure 27 below describes the protocol stack for RSU-based and AVP RVO 
AS-based facilities layer implementation architecture option (respectively).
Figure 28 describes the protocol stack of ‘Smart RSU’ implementation architecture 
where the AVP RVO AS and the RSU are collocated.
As noted above, vehicle side protocols are implementation specific and may vary 
between vehicle OEMs and/or vehicle models and is out of scoup of this document.


--- PAGE 64 ---

Cross Working Group Work Item 64
Contents
Short interruption to connectivity 
between vehicle and Vehicle Backend 
at drop-off and pick-up areas.
Connectivity interruption only 
happens when the AVP network’s 
preferred MNO is different from 
the one used for connecting the 
vehicle on the public roads. Such 
interruption caused by network 
switching can be optimised down 
to a few seconds interruption, if 
information about the preferred 
MNO can be provided to the UE in 
advance.
See Section 8.1.2. 
Vehicle power-saving mode.
The cellular network supported by 
the Discontinuous Reception (DRX) 
framework promote UE energy 
saving.
See Section 8.1.5.
Vehicle remote wake-up.
As the cellular public network is 
available in parking facilities, the 
remote wake-up feature can be 
implemented via a cellular Uu 
modem.
Service Level Requirements of the 
Vehicle Motion Control. 
SLR values in the 5GAA Use Case 
Description [3] can be fulfilled by 
public cellular networks.
That cellular networks can fulfil SLRs 
has been previously demonstrated, 
e.g. at the AVP PoC [8].
10.2 Conformance of SNPN network solution
Table 2: Conformance of SNPN network solution to AVP Type-2 requirements outlined in Section 5
AVP deployment requirements Cellular non-public SNPN solution Note
Security and privacy requirements. 
All communication links and logical 
interfaces implemented using cellular 
network are secured through E2E 
encrypted TLS or DTLS connections, 
and interconnected actors are 
mutually authenticated using 
certificates.
Same as Section 9.1.
Trust between vehicle OEM and AVP 
Operator domain.
For AVP network access, SNPN 
provide SIM or certificate based 
authentication.
For transport and application layer 
authentication, cellular networks 
support any authentication solution 
using IP-based connections, e.g. 
TLS, DTLS, digital certificated or user 
credential-based authentication.
Please refer to Section 8.2.2.5 for 
SNPN authentication.
If digital certificates are used, the 
appropriate Public Key Infrastructure 
needs to be in place, to ensure 
mutual trust between authenticated 
entities. This is out of scope of the 
present document.
Access for vehicle to Vehicle Backend. The access to the Vehicle Backend is 
provided via SNPN network.
Vehicle App and Vehicle AS need 
to maintain a valid IP route to the 
vehicle.


--- PAGE 65 ---

Cross Working Group Work Item 65
Contents
Short interruption to connectivity 
between vehicle and Vehicle Backend 
at drop-off and pick-up areas.
Connectivity interruption only 
happens when the vehicle switches 
from the OEM MNO network to SNPN 
network. Such interruption caused by 
network switching can be optimised 
down to a few seconds interruption, 
if information about the SNPN can be 
provided to the UE in advance.
See Section 8.2.2.4 for switching to 
SNPN network.
Vehicle power-saving mode.
The cellular network supported by 
the Discontinuous Reception (DRX) 
framework promote UE energy 
saving.
See Section 8.1.5 for DRX. DRX is a 
radio interface feature to allow the 
UE to pause reception in order to 
save power and battery. The cycles 
are up to 10,240 ms and so they 
are relatively short compared to 
IP address lease times. Hence, this 
technology and the requirement is 
not in conflict with the requirement 
that the IP address needs to be 
maintained valid in Vehicle Backend 
as the IP lease time is hours or even 
days.
Vehicle remote wake-up.
As the SNPN network is available in 
parking facilities, the remote wake-
up feature can be implemented via a 
cellular Uu modem.
Assumption is that there is a valid IP 
connection between Vehicle AS and 
Vehicle App.
Service Level Requirements of the 
Vehicle Motion Control. 
SLR values in the 5GAA Use Case 
Description [3] can be fulfilled by 
SNPN networks.


--- PAGE 67 ---

Cross Working Group Work Item 67
Contents
Annex A: Considerations on 
messages and protocols among 
ecosystem stakeholders for AVP service
This document focuses on the cellular and PC5 Direct Communication solution 
framework for AVP Type 2 use case. The solution framework has been developed to 
be generic, to support any application layer message and protocol that follows the 
interface and information definitions in ISO 23374-1 [1]. 
The following tables summarise the messages used in the communication solution 
framework and the candidate SDOs or industry associations, to our best knowledge, 
where such messages and related protocols can potentially be defined. The actual 
standardisation work or industry agreement have to be discussed among ecosystem 
stakeholders and it is out of scope of this 5GAA work item.
Interface
Message name
Step no. in 
communication 
sequence chart
Type Notes
From To
AVP User App User AS Parking service 
request
II.1 Proprietary
Subject to User 
SP’s decisionParking 
reservation 
request
III.1
User AS AVP User App Parking Service 
Availability
II.10
Parking 
reservation 
response
III.8
AVP Vehicle App Vehicle AS Parking service 
request
II.3 Proprietary
Subject to OEM’s 
decisionParking 
reservation 
request
III.3
Vehicle AS AVP Vehicle App Parking service 
availability
II.11
Parking 
reservation 
response
III.9
User AS Vehicle AS Parking service 
request
II.2 To be 
standardised, 
to enable User 
backend and 
vehicle backend 
interoperability
EPA
Parking 
reservation 
request
III.2 EPA
Vehicle AS User AS Parking service 
availability
II.9 EPA
Parking 
reservation 
response
III.7 EPA


--- PAGE 68 ---

Cross Working Group Work Item 68
Contents
Vehicle AS AVP Operator AS Parking service 
request
II.7 To be 
standardised, to 
enable OEM and 
AVP operator 
interoperability
EPA
Parking 
reservation 
request
III.4 EPA
AVP Operator AS Vehicle AS Parking service 
availability
II.8 EPA
Parking 
reservation 
response
III.6 EPA
Vehicle AS Interchange 
Function
Service discovery 
request
II.5 To be 
standardised, to 
enable Vehicle AS 
and Interchange 
interoperability
EPA and C-Roads 
(for message 
transport)
Interchange 
Function
Vehicle AS Service discovery 
response
II.6 EPA and C-Roads 
(for message 
transport) 
AVP Vehicle App SMDP+/Cert. S. 
(for AVP NW)
Download and 
install AVP 
SNPN profile or 
certificate
III.10 To be 
standardised, to 
enable Vehicle 
App and SMDP+/
Cert. Server 
interoperability 
3GPP, GSMA
SMDP+/Cert. S. 
(for AVP NW)
AVP Vehicle App Download and 
install AVP 
SNPN profile or 
certificate
III.10 3GPP, GSMA
Interface
Message name
Step no. in 
communication 
sequence chart
Type Notes
From To
AVP Vehicle App Vehicle AS Vehicle reached 
parking facility
A.2 Proprietary
Vehicle AS User AS Vehicle reached 
parking facility
A.3 To be standardised 5GAA, EPA
User AS AVP User App User confirms 
arrival
A.4 Proprietary
AVP User App User AS User confirms 
arrival
A.4 Proprietary
User AS AVP Operator AS Vehicle reached 
parking facility
A.6 To be standardised 5GAA, EPA
AVP Operator AS AVP RVO AS Vehicle reached 
parking facility
A.7 Proprietary
AVP RVO AS AVP Operator AS Vehicle reached 
parking facility
A.10 Proprietary
AVP Operator AS User AS Vehicle reached 
parking facility
A.11 To be standardised 5GAA, EPA
User AS Vehicle AS Reservation data A.12 To be standardised 5GAA, EPA
Vehicle AS AVP Vehicle App Vehicle dynamic 
parameter request
A.13 Proprietary
AVP Vehicle App Vehicle AS Vehicle dynamic 
parameter 
response
A.14 Proprietary
Vehicle AS User AS Vehicle dynamic 
parameter
A.15 To be standardised 5GAA, EPA
User AS AVP Operator AS Reservation data A.16 To be standardised 5GAA, EPA
AVP Operator AS AVP RVO AS Communication 
Session_ID
A.18 Proprietary


--- PAGE 71 ---

Cross Working Group Work Item 71
Contents
AVP RVO AS MNO NW /
AVP SNPN
Request QoS 
settings for AVP 
session (at QoS 
API)
C.14 To be standardised 5GAA
MNO NW /
AVP SNPN
AVP RVO AS Ack QoS settings 
for AVP session
C.15 To be standardised 5GAA
Interface
Message name
Step no. in 
communication 
sequence chart
Type Notes
From To
AVP Vehicle App Vehicle AS Vehicle state D.7 Proprietary, subject 
to OEM’s decision
User AS AP User App Vehicle state D.9 Proprietary, 
subject to User SP’s 
decision.
AVP Vehicle App AVP RVO AS Functional rime 
sync request
D.1 To be 
standardised, to 
enable OEM and 
AVP operator 
interoperability 
ETSI ITS
Vehicle state D.5 ETSI ITS
Vehicle debug D.5a (Optional) ETSI 
ITS
Recorded 
messages
D.5b (Optional) ETSI 
ITS
Safety time sync 
request
D.10 ETSI ITS
Driving permission 
ACK
D.13 (Optional) ETSI 
ITS
AVP RVO AS

AVP Vehicle App Functional time 
sync response
D.2 ETSI ITS
PathSnippet D.3 ETSI ITS
Coordination 
permission
D.4 (Optional)
ETSI ITS
Drive command D.6 ETSI ITS
Safety time Sync 
response
D.11 ETSI ITS
Driving permission D.12 ETSI ITS
Vehicle AS User AS Vehicle state D.8 To be 
standardised, to 
enable Vehicle 
backend and 
User backend 
interoperability.
5GAA, EPA
MNO NW / AVP 
SNPN
AVP RVO AS QoS notification 
in case of QoS 
change
D.14 To be 
standardised, to 
enable network 
operator and 
AVP operator 
interoperability.
3GPP, CAMARA,


--- PAGE 74 ---

Cross Working Group Work Item 74
Contents
Interface
Message name
Step no. in 
communication 
sequence chart
Type Notes
From To
AVP Vehicle App Vehicle AS Vehicle left 
parking facility
J.1 Proprietary
Vehicle AS User AS Vehicle left 
parking facility
J.2 To be standardised 5GAA, EPA
User AS AVP Operator AS Vehicle left 
parking facility
J.3 To be standardised 5GAA, EPA
AVP RVO AS AVP Operator AS Vehicle left 
parking facility
J.4 Proprietary
AVP Operator AS User AS Check-out report J.5 To be standardised 5GAA, EPA
User AS AVP User App Check-out result J.6 Proprietary
AVP Operator AS AVP RVO AS Close session J.7 Proprietary
AVP Operator AS Vehicle AS Close session J.8 To be standardised 5GAA
AVP Operator AS User AS Close session J.9 To be standardised 5GAA, EPA