--- PAGE 1 ---

This is a U.S. Government work and may be copied and distributed without permission.
This is a U.S. Government work and may be copied and distributed without permission.
SAFETY ANALYSIS APPROACHES FOR 
AUTOMOTIVE ELECTRONIC CONTROL 
SYSTEMS
Qi Van Eikema Hommes, Ph.D.
Advanced Vehicle Technology Division
John A Volpe National Transportation Systems Center
Office of the Secretary of Transportation
U.S. Department of Transportation
January 22, 2015
The National Transportation Systems Center
Advancing transportation innovation for the public good


--- PAGE 2 ---

This is a U.S. Government work and may be copied and distributed without permission.SAE INTERNATIONAL This is a U.S. Government work and may be copied and distributed without permission.
• Overview of the Electronics Reliability Research
• On-going Safety Analysis Projects
• Hazard and Safety Analysis Approaches
• Summary
Presentation Outline
2


--- PAGE 3 ---

This is a U.S. Government work and may be copied and distributed without permission.SAE INTERNATIONAL This is a U.S. Government work and may be copied and distributed without permission.
NHTSA’s Electronics Reliability Research*
3
Engage stakeholders, build a knowledge base
• Industry based, voluntary process standards research
• Integrated diagnostics, prognostics capabilities research
• Effective failure response mechanisms research
Identify, define, and prioritize systems that may need new safety 
requirements
• Develop failure typology for electronic control systems
• Review and evaluate available data sources and their suitability
Develop functional safety requirements for safety-critical automotive 
control systems
• Hazard Analyses using Hazard and Operability (HazOp) analysis method and System 
Theoretic Process Analysis (STPA) method
• Safety requirements
Research gaps in functional safety approaches for application to 
safety-critical electronic control systems, including highly automated 
vehicles
• Rechargeable energy storage, accelerator/electronic throttle controls, automated lane 
centering 
• Human Factors impacts
• Increased complexity impacts
* Cem Hatipoglu and Dave Freeman, “Government Perspective: NHTSA’s Electronics Reliability & Functional Safety Research,” 
International Conference on Managing Functional Safety, 9/16/2014.


--- PAGE 4 ---

This is a U.S. Government work and may be copied and distributed without permission.SAE INTERNATIONAL This is a U.S. Government work and may be copied and distributed without permission.
Goal
Support the need for additional safety requirements about the failures 
and countermeasures of the ACS with electronic faults, such as errant 
ETC signals.
Objectives
• Conduct hazard analysis of electronic-related ACS/ETC failures
• Identify safety requirements and safety constraints 
Focus
• Light vehicles (gross vehicle weight rating under 10,000 pounds)
• Seven propulsion system variants: gasoline Internal Combustion 
Engine (ICE), diesel ICE, Electric Vehicle (EV), Hybrid Electric Vehicle 
(HEV) with gasoline IC (series, parallel, series-parallel), and HEV with 
fuel cells.
Safety Analysis of Accelerator Control Systems (ACS) / Electronic 
Throttle Controls (ETC)
4


--- PAGE 5 ---

This is a U.S. Government work and may be copied and distributed without permission.SAE INTERNATIONAL This is a U.S. Government work and may be copied and distributed without permission.
Goal
Ensure the safe operation and functional safety of ALC control 
systems at all NHTSA automation levels.
Objectives
• Conduct comprehensive hazard analysis
• Define functional safety concepts and requirements
• Propose initial requirements for improving driver awareness and 
training
Focus
• Light vehicles (gross vehicle weight rating under 10,000 pounds)
• Steering and/or braking lateral controls
• Shared lateral and longitudinal control systems
Safety Analysis of Automated Lane Centering Controls (ALC)
5


--- PAGE 6 ---

This is a U.S. Government work and may be copied and distributed without permission.SAE INTERNATIONAL This is a U.S. Government work and may be copied and distributed without permission.
Goal
Conduct research in selected areas of hazard analysis and safety 
management of automotive RESS to improve the technical understanding of 
these areas and build the foundation for follow-on research.
Objectives
• Understand hazards and severity levels in context of functional safety of 
RESS Battery Management Systems
• Understand system diagnostics, data logging, and prognostics
• Identify safety-critical information needs and effective methods to 
communicate this information to operators, first and second responders, and 
service technicians
• Address safety-related instructions and training needs 
Focus
• Light vehicles (gross vehicle weight rating under 10,000 pounds)
Safety Management of Automotive 
Rechargeable Energy Storage Systems (RESS)
6


--- PAGE 7 ---

This is a U.S. Government work and may be copied and distributed without permission.SAE INTERNATIONAL This is a U.S. Government work and may be copied and distributed without permission.
• Follow the process in the ISO 26262 Concept 
Phase.
• Apply multiple approaches for hazard and safety 
analysis:
– Hazard and Operability (HAZOP) Analysis 
– Failure Mode and Effects Analysis (FMEA)
– System Theoretic Process Analysis (STPA)
• Aim to identify a comprehensive list of hazards and 
causal factors in order to support the development of 
safety requirements.
• Assess driver-vehicle interaction for vehicle 
automation levels 2-4.
Note: This presentation will focus on the STPA method, 
assuming the audience is familiar with HAZOP and FMEA.
Analysis Process and Approaches
7
Item Definition:
System Scope and Definition
System Block Diagram
Vehicle Level Hazard Analysis
STPA Step 1
HAZOP
Risk Assessment
Vehicle Level Safety Goals with 
ASIL
Automotive Safety Integrity 
Level (ASIL)
Safety Analysis
Vehicle Level Hazards
FMEA
STPA Step 2
Functional Safety  Concept:
1. Fault detection & failure mitigation 
2. Safe states
3. Driver warning & degradation strategy
4. Allocation to system elements 
Functional Safety Requirements
Existing industry practice in meeting 
the functional safety requirements
*ISO 26262 does not recommend or endorse a particular method for hazard and 
safety analyses. Other comparable and valid hazard and safety analysis methods 
may be used at the discretion of the analyst/engineer.


--- PAGE 8 ---

This is a U.S. Government work and may be copied and distributed without permission.SAE INTERNATIONAL This is a U.S. Government work and may be copied and distributed without permission.
• A hazard analysis method aimed to identify causes 
leading to vehicle-level losses
• A top-down systems engineering approach
• Incorporates control system theory
• Considers both component failures and system 
interactions
• Integrates driver-vehicle interface in the overall 
modeling
• Assists the identification of software safety 
requirements
• Provides a well-guided and structured analysis process 
• Produces documented and traceable rationales that link 
component failures and unsafe interactions to vehicle-
level hazards and losses
• Generates hazards and causal factors that are inputs to 
safety requirements and constraints
System Theoretic Process Analysis (STPA)
8


--- PAGE 9 ---

This is a U.S. Government work and may be copied and distributed without permission.SAE INTERNATIONAL This is a U.S. Government work and may be copied and distributed without permission.
System Description:
• Functional description
• System scope definition
• control structure of the system (block diagram)
System-Level Loss:
An undesired and unplanned event that results in the 
loss of human life or injury, property damage, 
environmental pollution, etc.
Hazard: 
A system state or set of conditions that, together with a 
particular set of worst-case environmental conditions, 
will lead to a system-level loss.
Analysis Steps
9


--- PAGE 10 ---

This is a U.S. Government work and may be copied and distributed without permission.SAE INTERNATIONAL This is a U.S. Government work and may be copied and distributed without permission.
Unsafe Control Actions (UCAs) are commanded by 
controllers that can potentially cause the vehicle 
systems to transition from safe to hazardous states.
UCA Identification:
For each control action, consider:
1. Relevant system states
2. Six UCA guidewords
STPA Step 1: Unsafe Control Actions
10


--- PAGE 11 ---

This is a U.S. Government work and may be copied and distributed without permission.SAE INTERNATIONAL This is a U.S. Government work and may be copied and distributed without permission.
Causal factors (CFs) consider the following 
aspects of the control systems:
• Controller
• Sensor 
• Actuator 
• Controlled Process
• Communication links (wiring, connectors, or 
communication bus)
• Unsafe Interaction with Other Vehicle Systems
• Unsafe Interaction with External Environment 
STPA Step 2: Causal Factor Categories
11


--- PAGE 12 ---

This is a U.S. Government work and may be copied and distributed without permission.SAE INTERNATIONAL This is a U.S. Government work and may be copied and distributed without permission.
Gasoline ICE ACS/ETC STPA Statistics
12


--- PAGE 13 ---

This is a U.S. Government work and may be copied and distributed without permission.SAE INTERNATIONAL This is a U.S. Government work and may be copied and distributed without permission.
Example Results (Preliminary) from the Gasoline ICE ACS/ETC 
STPA
13


--- PAGE 14 ---

This is a U.S. Government work and may be copied and distributed without permission.SAE INTERNATIONAL This is a U.S. Government work and may be copied and distributed without permission.
Example Results (Preliminary) from the Gasoline ICE ACS/ETC 
STPA (Continued)
14
Hazard Uncontrolled Vehicle Propulsion
Unsafe
Control 
Action
Example
The Engine Control Module (ECM) does not issue the Enter Brake/Throttle Override (BTO) 
Mode command when:
- driver presses the accelerator pedal,
- driver presses the brake pedal, and
- vehicle speed is 10 mph or greater.
Causal 
Factor 
Examples
Component 
/Connection Causal Factor
Engine Control 
Module
The sequence of pedal application is either not considered or is incorrectly 
considered in the software logic for entering BTO or Normal mode.
Accelerator
Pedal Position 
Sensor 
(APPS)
A hardware failure in the accelerator pedal position sensor could result in an 
open circuit or an intermittent open circuit. If the signal from the APPS 
becomes intermittent, this could cause the ECM to think the pedal conflict is 
removed and exit BTO mode.
Connection 
between Brake 
Pedal Position
Sensor and 
Engine Control 
Module
Chafing or interference from other vehicle systems could affect the 
connection between the brake pedal position sensor and ECM (e.g., wiring is 
cut). This could cause the ECM to receive no signal or an incorrect, 
intermittent, or delayed signal from the brake pedal position sensor.


--- PAGE 15 ---

This is a U.S. Government work and may be copied and distributed without permission.SAE INTERNATIONAL This is a U.S. Government work and may be copied and distributed without permission.
• Research follows the process descr ibed in the Concept Phase of the 
ISO 26262 standard.
• STPA, HAZOP, and FMEA methods are used for comprehensive 
hazard and safety analyses.
• Results of the hazard and safety analyses are used to generate the 
functional safety concept and the safety requirements.
• Hazard and safety analyses of the ACS/ETC and ALC control systems 
are underway. 
• Completed the safety analysis for the automotive RESS.
Summary
15


--- PAGE 16 ---

This is a U.S. Government work and may be copied and distributed without permission.
This is a U.S. Government work and may be copied and distributed without permission.
QUESTIONS?
Qi Van Eikema Hommes
Electronics Engineer
Advanced Vehicle Technology Division
Volpe National Transportation Systems Center
qi.vaneikemahommes@dot.gov
(617) 494-2964
16