--- PAGE 1 ---

Bitte decken Sie die schraffierte Fläche mit einem Bild ab.
Please cover the shaded area with a picture.
(24,4 x 13,2 cm)
Mobility is the Heartbeat of Life
Ultrasonic Parking Sensor
www.continental-automotive.com
CES 2021


--- PAGE 2 ---

Internal
CES 2021
If interested in this business unit or technology, contact us for more information - link
Ultrasonic Parking Sensor
Passive Safety and Sensorics
› Continental Ultrasonic Sensor (CUS) is completing 
Continental’s Automated Driving/Parking (AD/P) product 
portfolio. 
› CUS for Parking, is a sensor dedicated to be used in low 
speed maneuvering situations (Speed < 10 km/hour).
It measures the time of flight to an object (Echo-Localization 
principle).
› The sensor sends an ultrasound echo (wave) and receives a 
signal (wave reflection by an object) after a certain period of 
time. The time of flight is converted to a measured 
distance. Software in the ECU processes these measurements 
and determines the appropriate actions to take.


--- PAGE 3 ---

Internal
CES 2021
Ultrasonic Parking Sensor
Passive Safety and Sensorics
Benefits & Features
› Easy and precise parking
› ​Stress free vehicle maneuverability
› 360-degree car protection
› ​Environment visualization and monitoring​
› Compliance with major OEM requirements​
› Coding among sensors and Multi measurement
› ​Self diagnostics
› ​Signal filtering 
› ASIL-B according to ISO 26262
› ​Paintable​
Technical Information
› Supply voltage range: +9V …+16V​
› Operating temp range: -40 … +85°C​
› IP classification: IP6K9K​
› Diameter: 15.5 mm
› Frequency: 52 KHz
› Car connectivity P2P or bus
› Car communication DSI3 interface
› 3 pins per sensor group 
› Detection ranges target: <10 cm – up to 600 cm
› Opening angles: 120° x 60°


--- PAGE 4 ---

Internal
CES 2021
CUS – Advantages
› Dynamic range mode
› Enabling the combination of Parking Distance Control mode (PDC) and 
Parking Slot Detection mode (PLV) in one design type. This leads to the 
reduction of design variance in the vehicle architecture. 
› Higher signal robustness against disturbance
› Echo source identification is reliable and robust (identifying own 
transmitted signals)
› Continuous signal transmission (sensors fire parallel to another) supporting 
higher data rates vs. sequential signal transmission with competing sensor 
generation 
› Improvements compared to competing sensors
› Supports automated driving/safety levels with higher maximum operation 
speed for emergency braking 
Ultrasonic Parking Sensor
Passive Safety and Sensorics